{\rtf1\ansi\uc1\deff13\deflang1024
{\fonttbl{\f0\fnil\fcharset0 Zapf Chancery;}
{\f1\fnil\fcharset204 Zapf Chancery;}
{\f2\fnil\fcharset204 Times;}
{\f3\fnil\fcharset204 Helvetica;}
{\f4\fnil\fcharset204 Helvetica;}
{\f5\fnil\fcharset204 Courier;}
{\f6\fnil\fcharset2 Symbol;}
{\f7\fnil\fcharset0 MT Extra;}
{\f8\fnil\fcharset238 Zapf Chancery;}
{\f9\fnil\fcharset238 Times;}
{\f10\fnil\fcharset238 Helvetica;}
{\f11\fnil\fcharset238 Helvetica;}
{\f12\fnil\fcharset238 Courier;}
{\f13\fnil\fcharset0 Times;}
{\f14\fnil\fcharset0 Helvetica;}
{\f15\fnil\fcharset0 Helvetica;}
{\f16\fnil\fcharset0 Courier;}
}
{\colortbl;
\red0\green0\blue0;
\red0\green0\blue255;
\red0\green255\blue255;
\red0\green255\blue0;
\red255\green0\blue255;
\red255\green0\blue0;
\red255\green255\blue0;
\red255\green255\blue255;
\red0\green0\blue128;
\red0\green128\blue128;
\red0\green128\blue0;
\red128\green0\blue128;
\red128\green0\blue0;
\red128\green128\blue0;
\red128\green128\blue128;
\red192\green192\blue192;
}
{\stylesheet
{\s0\fs20\snext0 Normal;}
{\s2\ql\sb240\sa60\keepn\f13\b\fs40 \sbasedon0\snext0 heading 1;}
{\s2\ql\sb240\sa60\keepn\f13\b\fs40\li0 \sbasedon0\snext0 heading 1;}
{\s1\ql\sb240\sa60\keepn\f13\b\fs40\li0 \sbasedon0\snext0 heading 1;}
{\s6\ql\sb240\sa60\keepn\f13\b\fs24\li2048 \sbasedon0\snext0 heading 5;}
{\s3\ql\sb240\sa60\keepn\f13\b\fs32\li512 \sbasedon0\snext0 heading 2;}
{\s7\ql\sb240\sa60\keepn\f13\b\fs24\li2560 \sbasedon0\snext0 heading 6;}
{\s4\ql\sb240\sa60\keepn\f13\b\fs32\li1024 \sbasedon0\snext0 heading 3;}
{\s5\ql\sb240\sa60\keepn\f13\b\fs24\li1536 \sbasedon0\snext0 heading 4;}
{\s6\ql\sb240\sa60\keepn\f13\b\fs24 \sbasedon0\snext0 heading 5;}
{\s1\qc\sb240\sa60\keepn\f13\b\fs40 \sbasedon0\snext0 part;}
{\s3\ql\sb240\sa60\keepn\f13\b\fs32 \sbasedon0\snext0 heading 2;}
{\s7\ql\sb240\sa60\keepn\f13\b\fs24 \sbasedon0\snext0 heading 6;}
{\s4\ql\sb240\sa60\keepn\f13\b\fs32 \sbasedon0\snext0 heading 3;}
{\s5\ql\sb240\sa60\keepn\f13\b\fs24 \sbasedon0\snext0 heading 4;}
}
{\info
{\title Original file was fishandfisheries-cover-letter.tex}
{\doccomm Created using latex2rtf 1.9.19 (released Nov 20 2007) on Tue Aug  3 21:02:03 2010
}
}
{\footer\pard\plain\f13\fs24\qc\chpgn\par}
\paperw12280\paperh15900\margl1445\margr1445\margt1445\margb1445\pgnstart0\widowctrl\qj\ftnbj\f13\aftnnar
{{
\par\pard\qr \par\chdate 
\par\pard\ql \pard\ql\sl240\slmult1 \fi360 Professor Tony J. Pitcher\par
\pard\ql\sl240\slmult1 \fi0 Peter Wall Institute of Advanced Studies\par
\pard\ql\sl240\slmult1 \fi0 6331 Crescent Road\par
\pard\ql\sl240\slmult1 \fi0 Vancouver, BC, Canada, V6T 1Z2Dear Dr. Pitcher,
\par\pard\qj  Please find attached a manuscript titled \ldblquote {\i Assessing the knowledge-base for commercially exploited marine fishes and invertebrates with a new global database of stock assessments}\rdblquote , that we wish to submit for review to Fish and Fisheries. The article was encouraged during pre-submission discussions with yourself and Prof. Paul Hart.\par
\pard\qj\sl240\slmult1 \fi360 We present the first global compilation of stock assessment data since the Stock-Recruitment Database of our late colleague Ransom A. Myers, compiled in the 1990s. We build and extend upon this pioneering work and believe that the present database will make an important contribution to fisheries research. In accordance with the response to our presubmission enquiry, we have have focused on a synthesis of the database in the form of an assessment of the knowledge base for exploited marine fish. On a global scale, we report on the geographic, taxonomic and temporal coverage and availability of assessments. We compare the taxonomic coverage of caught taxa as a subset of marine fish taxa and assessed taxa as a subset of caught taxa. Using MSY-based reference points, the status of assessed species is reported and shown to exhibit marked regional variation. We apply a suite of novel graphical techniques throughout such that the multi-dimensional contents of the database and most pertinent results can be conveyed to the reader.\par
\pard\qj\sl240\slmult1 \fi360 We are committed to making the database available to other practitioners and consider Fish and Fisheries the best journal to reach our intended audience of fisheries scientists.\par
\pard\qj\sl240\slmult1 \fi360 We would like to propose the following 3 reviewers for this manuscript:\par
{\pard\qj\sl240\slmult1 \sb50 \li600\fi-300 1.\tab {\b Dr. Rainer Froese} - Leibniz Institute of Marine Sciences, D\'fcsternbrooker Weg 20, 24105 Kiel, Germany - Phone: +49 (431) 600 4579, Fax: +49 (431) 600 1699 - Email: rfroese@ifm-geomar.de \par
\pard\qj\sl240\slmult1 \sb50 \li600\fi-300 2.\tab {\b Dr. Keith Sainsbury} - Division of Marine Research, CSIRO GPO Box 1538, Hobart, Tasmania 7001, Australia - Phone: +61 3 6232 5369, Fax: +61 3 6232 5199 - Email: Keith.Sainsbury@csiro.au \par
\pard\qj\sl240\slmult1 \sb50 \li600\fi-300 3.\tab {\b Dr. Randall Peterman} - School of Resource and Environmental Management, Simon Fraser University, 8888 University Drive, Burnaby, British Columbia, Canada V5A 1S6 - Phone: (778) 782-4683, Fax: (778) 782-4968 - Email: peterman@sfu.ca \par
}\pard\qj\sl240\slmult1 \sb60 \fi0 These practitioners conduct research in themes related to the global status of fish stocks and have not been associated with the present work. Dr. Froese provided us with a detailed taxonomic list of fish species from FishBase but was otherwise not involved in any of the analyses. The material contained in the submitted manuscript is original and has not been submitted elsewhere.\par
\pard\qj\sl240\slmult1 \fi360 We thank you for the opportunity to submit this work for consideration as an article in Fish and Fisheries and look forward to hearing from you.\par

\par\pard\qr \pard\qr\sl240\slmult1 \fi360 Sincerely,
\par\par\par 
\par\pard\qj \par
\pard\qj\sl240\slmult1 \fi360 ccC{\'f3}il{\'ed}n Minto, Marine and Freshwater Research Centre, Galway-Mayo Institute of Technology, Dublin Road, Galway, Ireland ccOlaf Jensen, Institute of Marine and Coastal Sciences, Rutgers University, USA ccJulia Baum, National Center for Ecological Analysis and Synthesis, University of California in Santa Barbara, USA } }\par
}
